TOPIC . . . COMMENT

The Structure of Unscientific Revolutions

In the view of many linguists working in syntax Chomsky's (1995), (1998),
and (1999) minimalist program (MP) constitutes a major paradigm change
in the theory of grammar. On the Government Binding (GB) model the
well-formedness of a sentence is determined by a set of conditions which
apply locally to each element in the sequence of structures that comprises
its derivation. Therefore, GB represented a move towards the constraint-
based approach that characterizes many non-derivational theories, such as
HPSG and LFG. By contrast, in addition to local constraints on operations
and the structures they produce, the MP adds economy principles that apply
either globally to sets of alternative derivations (Chomsky (1995)), or
locally to sets of possible operations at each point in a derivation (Collins
(1997) and Yang (1997)). Both the foundational assumptions of the MP
and the way in which these have come to be accepted by a large number of
linguists previously working within GB raise a number of important issues
concerning the nature of theory construction and scientific discussion in
the field.

Underlying the economy principles of the MP is the idea that grammar is a
perfect computational system for mapping a selection of lexical items (a
numeration) to a pair of interfaces <LF,PF> with conceptual
(semantic-pragmatic) and articulatory (phonetic) cognitive modules,
respectively. The well-formedness conditions on LF and PF are externally
imposed by interpretability requirements of the modules to which they
provide interfaces. The syntactic component of a grammar provides an
optimal derivation from lexical numerations to interface representations.
Hence, economy principles ensure the efficiency of the mapping. The
grammar exhibits what Chomsky refers to as virtual conceptual necessity
in that its principles and operations provide the minimal devices required
to achieve optimal derivations from lexical numerations to well-formed
<LF,PF> pairs.

A significant problem with this approach is that Chomsky does not
clarify the notion of perfection or optimality as a property of grammar.

---

[Page 2]

Attempting to render this concept precise within the MP leads to severe
problems. Chomsky's claim that grammar is a perfect system cannot mean
that it has a relatively low degree of computational complexity as compared
to other imaginable systems of formal grammar, as this is clearly not the
case. Moreover, economy principles, both global and local, add a
significant degree of complexity to the MP model of grammar that local
constraint-based grammars avoid.[1]

Chomsky does not intend optimality to be identified with the satisfaction
of a maximal number of defeasible local constraints, as in Optimality
Theory. He avoids the use of ranked defeasible conditions, and he treats
perfection as a property of grammar rather than a relative feature of a
derivation.

Perfection can also not be identified with biological efficiency, because
there is no obvious sense in which the language faculty is a more or less
efficient subsystem of the human organism than any other cognitive function.
If it is to be judged as optimal in a biological sense, the obvious question
is in comparison to what. As no basis for such a comparison is offered, the
notion of grammar as a biologically optimal system is quite meaningless.

Finally, one may suggest that the notion of perfection that Chomsky has in
mind is based upon an analogy with the minima and maxima principles of
physics. So, for example, air pressure in a soap bubble produces a spherical
shape as the optimal geometric design for distributing this pressure.
Similarly, light reflecting off a mirror takes the path of least time between
two points. If this is, in fact, the sort of optimality that Chomsky has in
mind, then it has no place in the theory of grammar. Minimization/
maximization principles are derived from deeper physical properties of the
particles (waves, vectors, etc.) which satisfy them. They follow from the
subatomic structure and attributes of these particles, and are not themselves
basic elements of the theory. Hence they have no independent explanatory
status within physics, but are reducible to other principles. By contrast, the
MP takes economy conditions to be essential elements of the grammar and
the optimality which they encode to be one of its defining properties.

It seems, then, that the foundational assumption of the MP rests upon an
obscure metaphor rather than a precise claim with clear empirical content.
In fact, the MP looks like an awkward transcendental deduction of Universal
Grammar in which its adherents attempt to derive the formal properties

[1] See Johnson and Lappin (1997) and (1999) for detailed discussion of this point, as
well as extensive critical treatment of some of the conceptual and empirical problems raised
by the MP. For important observations reflecting alternative conceptions of grammatical
architecture, see also Jackendoff (1997) and Pollard (1997).

---

[Page 3]

of natural language by speculating on the set of operations and conditions
that provide the shortest route from a lexical numeration to a pair of LF
and PF representations. The distance metric invoked in these speculations
remains undefined and ungrounded in empirical considerations.

Vagueness and imprecision are not exactly unknown in much of the history
of linguistic theorizing. Taken in isolation the conceptual defects of the
derivational economy notion are probably no worse in kind than earlier
examples might be. What is altogether mysterious from a purely scientific
point of view is the rapidity with which a substantial number of
investigators, who had significant research commitments in the
Government-Binding framework, have abandoned that framework and much
of its conceptual inventory, virtually overnight. In its place they have
adopted an approach which, as far as we can tell, is in no way superior with
respect to either predictive capabilities nor explanatory power. Still more
remarkable is the widespread perception that a novel approach with no more
'battle-tested results' to its credit (and far narrower cross-linguistic
coverage) than its predecessor represents a conceptual breakthrough for
generative grammar, advancing it to the status enjoyed by the hardest of
physical sciences. Consider (as just one example) the strangely imaginative
assertion by Piatelli-Palmarini in his foreword to Uriagareka's Rhyme and
Reason that minimalist grammar

"is well on its way to becoming a full-blown natural science, offering a serious promise
of an advanced field of scientific inquiry whose idealizations, abstractions and deductions
will eventually match in depth and subtlety those of the most advanced domains of modern
science. Generative grammar is turning into a natural science already, because of what it is
now, not because of what it might one day turn into . . ."

And Uriagareka's fictional expositor of minimalism, the Linguist, echoes
this peculiar claim in his proclamation that 'this degree of elegance [of UG]
seems to be extraordinary. This is what I think makes linguistics closer to
physics than biology, somewhat mysteriously' (p. 60). Much of
Uriagareka's book consists in invoking a variety of scientific topics that
have become the staple cliches of trendy 'parascientific' chit-chat – chaos
theory, turbulence, emergent macroscopic phenomena, Fibonacci sequences,
the thermodynamics of living systems and so on – apparently on the
assumption that these issues, so airily cited in the book, have something to
do with the empirical content of the linguistic notions he advocates.

This groundless aura of scientism is used to promote the view that
minimalist theory has brought the study of syntax to a level of precision and
empirical coverage comparable to that of chemistry and physics. In fact,
Uriagareka does not manage to specify even a remotely credible connection
between the concepts and methodology of the MP and those of the

---

[Page 4]

natural sciences. Clearly a significant number of former GB adherents must
share Uriagareka's view. Why else would they simply discard a theoretical
framework which they had previously thought to be the best one available
for achieving genuine insight into the nature of human linguistic ability?

A comparison with paradigm change, at the level of the individual
researcher, in the more established sciences may be instructive. Arthur
Compton won the 1927 Nobel Prize in physics for his quantum-theoretic
explanation of wavelength shifts in high-frequency X-ray/electron
scattering. He was not a devotee of quantum physics when he began his
research on the problem, and he used his considerable technical gifts to
defend classical electrodynamics by constructing an account based on a
contemporary version of Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism. It was the
irreducible discrepancy between his classically predicted results and the
observed angle-dependent frequency spectrum of the output radiation that
led him to adopt a quantum mechanical account, which yielded a precise and
accurate prediction of the observed spectrum. Only this dramatic
experimental evidence for quantum physics caused Compton to give up the
classical view. A generation earlier, physicists had adopted special
relativity because of its success in predicting experimental and
observational outcomes that classical mechanics failed to explain. In the
following generation they came to embrace quantum field theory because of
its empirical superiority to standard quantum mechanics in accounting for
phenomena such as the Lamb shift in the hydrogen atom energy spectrum.
In none of these cases did scientists abandon the highly successful models
that they and their predecessors had developed except under pressure of
compelling scientific motivation. This consisted (primarily) in the emergence
of a new formalism that preserved the results of the previous paradigm while
contributing an empirically grounded model of a phenomenon that remained
unexplained – and in principle unexplainable – on the earlier account.

If linguists wish to use the practices followed in the natural sciences as a
guide, then it would be reasonable to expect the catalyst for the transition
from GB to the MP to be a significant body of results that follow directly
from minimalist principles, but are unavailable on any plausible version of
GB theory. But we see nothing of the kind in the comparison between the MP
and earlier avatars of transformational grammar. Why, then, are we witness
to a mass rejection of the previous decade and a half of linguistic theory?
Even the most cursory examination of the way in which physics conducts its
daily business and of the results that it has achieved is sufficient to expose
Piatelli-Palmarini's and Uriagareka's claims as radically misguided. The MP
simply does not bear serious comparison, for either accuracy or elegance, to
Lagrange's eighteenth century formulation

---

[Page 5]

of classical mechanics, let alone to the sophisticated contemporary
subdisciplines of the physical and mathematical sciences that Rhyme and
Reason invokes, mantra-like, to such little effect.

The ease and speed with which so many GB theorists have discarded the
theoretical framework in which they had invested so much research effort
and embraced the bizarrely vague and unmotivated assumptions of the MP
thus suggest that in large sections of the field theoretical commitment has
little to do with evidence or argument. It is entirely reasonable for Chomsky
to pursue his own research program on the basis of his intuition that it
provides an interesting and potentially fruitful line of inquiry. Clearly, the
burden of evidence and persuasion is on him to show us that this program is
worth taking up. What is not readily comprehensible is that large numbers
of researchers should substitute one theory for another simply on the basis
of Chomsky's personal authority, without subjecting his assumptions to the
sort of critical evaluation that they would normally apply to theoretical
innovations proposed under different authorship.

Again, comparison with the hard sciences is instructive. Einstein, perhaps
the greatest physicist ever, and Hilbert, one of the seminal figures in the
history of mathematics, were both profoundly mistaken about the most
important components of their respective mature scientific programs.
Einstein's efforts to formulate a unified theory of the gravitational and
electromagnetic field was undermined not only by his omission of nuclear
forces, but by his effort to extend the Riemannian geometric formalism of
general relativity to embrace the electromagnetic field. While continuing to
venerate him the rest of the physics community moved in an entirely
different direction, one that had far greater empirical success. Hilbert's
formalist program for mathematics consisted in an effort to reduce truth to
provability. Kurt Gödel showed this program to be in principle untenable in
1930, when he proved the incompleteness of any mathematical system with
sufficient expressive power to encode elementary number theory. He was an
obscure mathematician at the time, almost unknown outside of Vienna. The
difference in reputation between Hilbert and Gödel did not prevent the
complete collapse of the formalist program. In fact, within a decade Hilbert,
in a book co-authored with Paul Bernays, constructed an original proof of
Gödel's incompleteness theorem, showing that he fully appreciated the
implications of Gödel's work for his own program.

These incidents in the history of science show that the very greatest of
minds can be deeply mistaken. More importantly, they indicate clearly that
in real science, arguments from authority do not, in general, determine the
direction in which a field develops. There is no sense in which the scientific
status of the GB framework approaches that of physics at any

---

[Page 6]

period (or even, for that matter, that of contemporary geology or biology).
However, the equanimity with which so many of its adherents abandoned it
primarily on the strength of Chomsky's personal speculations, in the absence
of any compelling empirical motivation, is a disturbing reflection of the fact
that the constraints of evidence and rational argument appear to play a
strikingly tenuous role in generative grammar's transformationalist branch.

In the introduction to Chapter 4, Chomsky (1995) says:

"It is, furthermore, far from obvious that language should have anything at all like the
character postulated in the Minimalist Program, which is just that: a research program
concerned with filling the gaps and determining the answers to the basic questions raised
in the opening paragraph of the introduction, in particular, the question 'How "perfect" is
language?'"

Just so. Given the lack of any obvious content in the basic question that the
MP takes as its starting point, it is particularly surprising that so many
linguists have chosen to adopt its assumptions without demanding additional
clarification or empirical motivation. We know of no serious scientific
discipline where theoretical paradigms are granted large scale acceptance in
such a cavalier and uncritical manner. It should come as no surprise, then,
that linguists who exhibit so little respect for the basic theoretical
assumptions that guide their own work should be relatively immune from
interest in work done in alternative theoretical paradigms. We seem forced
to the conclusion that a not insignificant part of our field is labouring under
the manufacture of consent.

REFERENCES

Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Chomsky, Noam. 1998. Minimalist Inquiries: The Framework, manuscript, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Chomsky, Noam. 1999. Derivation by Phases, manuscript, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Collins, Christopher. 1997. Local Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1997. The Architecture of the Language Faculty, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Johnson, David and Shalom Lappin. 1997. 'A Critique of the Minimalist Program', Linguistics and Philosophy 20.
Johnson, David and Shalom Lappin. 1999. Local Constraints vs. Economy, CSLI, Stanford, CA.
Pollard, Carl. 1997. 'The Nature of Constraint-Based Grammar', Linguistic Research, Language Education and Research Institute, Kyung-Hee University, pp. 1–18.
Uriagareka, Juan. 1998. Rhyme and Reason, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

---

[Page 7]

Yang, C. 1997. Minimal Computation: Derivation of Syntactic Structures, unpublished MSc. thesis, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT.

Received June 7, 2000
Revised June 14, 2000

King's College, London — SHALOM LAPPIN (lappin@dcs.kcl.ac.uk)
Ohio State University — ROBERT D. LEVINE (levine@ling.ohio-state.edu)
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center — DAVID E. JOHNSON (dejohns@us.ibm.com)

Note: The views expressed in TOPIC ... COMMENT are those of the author(s). They should
not be construed as representing either the editor or the publisher of NLLT.
